# AY-3-8910 instrument editor

the AY-3-8910 instrument editor consists of three tabs.

## Sample

for sample settings, see [the Sample instrument editor](sample.md).

the only differences are the lack of an "Use wavetable" option, and the presence of a "Use sample" one.

note that using samples on AY is CPU expensive!

## Timer Macros

- **Timer FX**: applies a timer-based effect to either the tone or the hardware envelope.
  - 0: off.
  - 1: **PWM**: amplitude modulation of the tone.
  - 2: **SyncBuzzer**: hard-sync of the envelope (resetting its position to start).
- **TFX Offset**: difference between timer frequency and note pitch. notably affects the rate of PWM.
- **Timer Num** and **Timer Den**: sets the timer frequency to automatically match note pitch multiplied by Num and divided by Den.
  - if either value is 0, this automatic matching is disabled.
- **PWM Boundary**: sets the amount of modulation when in PWM mode.

note that timer effects might not be supported by VGM players, and are rather CPU expensive!

## Macros

- **Volume**: volume sequence.
- **Arpeggio**: pitch sequence.
- **Noise Freq**: noise generator frequency sequence.
  - note: global!
- **Waveform**: selector of sound type - square wave tone, noise and/or envelope generator.
  - you may select more than one option.
- **Pitch**: fine pitch.
- **Phase Reset**: trigger restart of **envelope**.
- **Envelope**: configures the hardware envelope.
  - **enable**: sets whether envelope is enabled.
  - **direction**: flips the envelope's direction.
  - **alternate**: when enabled, the envelope will change direction once it hits a boundary.
  - **hold**: sets whether the envelope should stop when hitting boundary, or loop.
- **AutoEnv Num** and **AutoEnv Den**: sets the envelope frequency to automatically match note pitch multiplied by Num and divided by Den.
  - if either value is 0, this automatic matching is disabled.
- **Force Period**: sets the tone period, which determines frequency.
  - overrides Arpeggio and Pitch macros.
- **Env Period**: sets the envelope period.
  - ignored if both AutoEnv macros are set.
