# ES5503 instrument editor

the ES5503 instrument editor is divided into 4 tabs:

- **ES5503**: for controlling the parameters of ES5503 sound channel.
- **Wavetable**: for wavetable-related controls.
- **Macros**: for macros controlling volume/arp/pitch/panning/etc.
- **Sample**: for sample-related controls.

## ES5503

There is a tricky feature of ES5503 when it comes to playing wavetables/samples. ES5503 can play waves of sizes 256, 512, 1024, 2048, 4096, 8192, 16384 and 32768 steps. When it encounters `0` in sample memory it stops playing the wavetable/sample, no matter what oscillator mode and wave size are.

- **Oscillator mode**: lets you select one of four possible oscillator modes:
  - **Freerun**: oscillator plays the whole wavetable/sample and loops back if it haven't encountered `0` in sample memory along the way. So if sample does not exactly fit to the one of aforementioned possible sizes it will stop playing after being played once.
  - **Oneshot**: oscillator plays the whole wavetable/sample once.
  - **Sync/AM**: sync mode is only possible between pairs of even and odd numbered oscillators, i.e. a lower even-numbered oscillator paired with a higher odd-numbered oscillator. When the even-numbered oscillator starts playing back its wavetable, its odd-numbered mate will be synchronized to it and begins its wavetable/sample simultaneously, aka hard sync. (info from [www.buchty.net](http://www.buchty.net/ensoniq/5503.html)) AM means amplitude modulation and works in reverse; odd-numbered oscillator modulates the volume of previous even-numbered oscillator. It's kinda tricky to work with this mode.
  - **Swap**: uses even/odd pairs of oscillators as explained above. Enabled oscillator plays its wavetable/sample once, then stops as if in oneshot mode, and launches its mate. This is how it is possible to play 64 KiB sample seamlessly.
- **Virtual softpan channel**: this is a software feature. Under the hood is just uses a pair of odd and even numbered channels, assigns them with the same wave, oscillator mode and frequency. Thus you effectively have one channel with 256-step panning. Furnace provides macros for individual left and right panning control.
- **Phase reset on key-on**: resets phase of the channel each time a new note plays. Does not apply when `03xx` and `EAxx` effects are used on the same row.

## Wavetable

this allows you to enable and configure the Furnace wavetable synthesizer. see [this page](wavesynth.md) for more information.

notes:
- you will need to reserve small bits of sample memory for wavetables (256 bytes per channel). The number of these reserved bits is equal to the maximum number of channels that play wavetables in your song **simultaneously**.

## Sample

for sample settings, see [the Sample instrument editor](sample.md).

## Macros

- **Volume**: volume sequence.
- **Arpeggio**: pitch sequence.
- **Oscillator mode**: oscillator mode.
- **Wavetable**: set wavetable (only in wavetable mode).
- **Panning (left)**: the volume of left channel (only in virtual softpan channel mode).
- **Panning (right)**: the volume of right channel (only in virtual softpan channel mode).
- **Pitch**: fine pitch.
  - **Relative**: when enabled, pitch changes are relative to the current pitch.
- **Phase Reset**: resets the waveform to its start.
- **Wave/sample pos.**: allows to manually set the starting offset of wavetable/sample.
- **Osc. output**: allows to manually set the output of an oscillator.