# Ensoniq ES5506 instrument editor

A very complex, yet powerful chip.

## Sample tab
Select the sample you want to play here.

## ES5506 tab
- **Filter Mode**: The ES5506 has a mode where you can filter any channel. It only has two filters, though.
  - `LP/K2, LP/K1`: Low-pass on filter 1, low-pass on filter 2
  - `LP/K2, LP/K2`: Additive low-pass on both filters
  - `HP/K2, LP/K1`: Low-pass on filter 1, high-pass on filter 2
  - `HP/K2, HP/K2`: Additive high-pass on both filters
- **Filter K1**: Filter strength for the first filter.
- **Filter K2**: Filter strength for the second filter.
- **Envelope Count**: Envelope speed for this channel.
- **Left Volume Ramp**: Envelope direction/speed for the left channel.
- **Right Volume Ramp**: Envelope direction/speed for the right channel.
- **Filter K1 Ramp**: Ditto, but for the first filter.
- **Filter K2 Ramp**: Ditto, but for the second filter.
- **K1 Ramp slowdown**: Whether to slow down the first filter's envelope.
- **K2 Ramp slowdown**: Whether to slow down the second filter's envelope.

## Macros
- **Volume**: Volume macro. The volume is non-linear.
- **Arpeggio**: Coarse pitch macro, in half-steps.
- **Filter Mode**: See above
- **Panning (left)**: Panning macro for the left channel.
- **Panning (right)**: Panning macro for the right channel.
- **Pitch**: Fine pitch macro.
- **Phase Reset**: If this bit is set, it will restart the currently playing sample on that channel.
- **Filter K1**: The first filter's strength.
- **Filter K2**: The second filter's strength.
- **Outputs**: What output channels (on your audio device) to output to. The ES5506 has the option to output surround sound, so this is where you configure that.
- **Control**: Options to control the sample.
  - Reverse: Play the sample in reverse.
  - Pause: Pause the sample at its current position.
