CONTRIBUTING.md, before:

# Contributing

contributions to Furnace are welcome!

# Issue reports

if you find an issue with Furnace, see the Issues section.

# Suggestions and other types of discussions

see the Discussions section.

**DO NOT USE THE ISSUES SECTION FOR THESE - it is only for ISSUES.**

# Other

## Getting ready

log into your Github account, and click the Fork button in the header of the project's page.

then open a terminal and clone your fork:

```
git clone git@github.com:USERNAME/furnace.git
```

(replace `USERNAME` with your username)

## Working

### Code

bug fixes, improvements and several other things accepted.

the coding style is described here:

- indentation: two spaces. **strictly** spaces. do NOT use tabs.
- modified 1TBS style:
  - no spaces in function calls
  - spaces between arguments in function declarations
  - no spaces in operations except for `||` and `&&`
  - no space between variable name and assignment
  - space between macro in string literals
  - space after comment delimiter
  - C++ pointer style: `void* variable` rather than `void *variable`
  - indent switch cases
  - preprocessor directives not intended
  - if macro comprises more than one line, indent
  - no new line after `template<>`
- do not use `_t` types, except for 64-bit integers and `size_t`.
- prefer built-in types:
  - `bool`
  - `signed char` or `unsigned char` are 8-bit
    - when the type is `char`, **always** specify whether it is signed or not.
    - unspecified `char` is signed on x86 and unsigned on ARM, so yeah.
    - the only situation in where unspecified `char` is allowed is for C strings (`const char*`).
  - `short` or `unsigned short` are 16-bit
  - `int` or `unsigned int` are 32-bit
  - `float` is 32-bit
  - `double` is 64-bit
  - `long long int` or `unsigned long long int` are 64-bit
    - avoid using 64-bit numbers as I still build for 32-bit systems.
    - two `long`s are required to make Windows happy.
    - prefer using `int64_t` or `uint64_t` for this specific case.
  - `size_t` are 32-bit or 64-bit, depending on architecture.
- in float/double operations, always use decimal and `f` if single-precision.
  - e.g. `1.0f` or `1.0` instead of `1`.
- prefer `NULL` over `nullptr` or any other proprietary null.
- only use `auto` if needed.
- avoid using `goto` unless absolutely required.
- use `String` for `std::string` (this is typedef'd in ta-utils.h).
- prefer using operator for String (std::string) comparisons (a=="").
- if you have to work with C strings, only use safe C string operations:
  - snprintf
  - strncpy
  - strncat
  - any other operation which specifies a limit

some files (particularly the ones in `src/engine/platform/sound` and `extern/`) don't follow this style.

you don't have to follow this style. I will fix it after I accept your contribution.

additional guidelines:

- in general **strongly** avoid breaking compatibility.
  - do not touch loadFur/saveFur unless you know what you're doing!
    - new fields must be at the end of each block to ensure forward compatibility
    - likewise, the instrument read/write functions in DivInstrument have to be handled carefully
    - any change to the format requires a version bump (see `src/engine/engine.h`).
    - do not bump the version number under any circumstances!
  - if you are making major changes to the playback routine, make sure to test with older songs to ensure nothing breaks.
    - I will run a test suite to make sure this is the case.
    - if something breaks, you might want to add a compatibility flag (this requires changing the format though).
- do not use `#pragma once`.
- do not memcmp() structs.
- on a switch block, **always** put `default` last and not in any other position.
  - I have fear of some C/C++ compilers ignoring the rest of cases upon hitting default.

### Do NOT Force-Push after submitting Pull Request

if you do so, your pull request will be closed.

### Demo Songs

just put your demo song in `demos/`! be noted there are some guidelines:

- avoid Nintendo song covers.
- avoid big label song covers.
- low effort compositions/covers may not be accepted at all.
- the following systems are not acceptable:
  - YMU759/MA-2: exists only for compatibility.
  - Pong: it is a joke system.
- the song shall be in Furnace file format.

## Finishing

after you've done your modifications, commit the changes and push.
then open your fork on GitHub and send a pull request.

## I don't know how to use Git but I want to contribute with a demo song

you can also contact me directly! [find me here.](https://tildearrow.org/?p=contact)

Commit message:

add "not all PRs will be accepted" to CONTRIBUTING.md

CONTRIBUTING.md, after:

# Contributing

## Issue reports

if you find an issue with Furnace, see the Issues section.

## Suggestions and other types of discussions

see the Discussions section.
**DO NOT USE THE ISSUES SECTION FOR THESE - it is only for ISSUES.**

## Code contributions

Furnace is currently a "solo/monarchy"-led project, rather than community-led (https://wackowiki.org/doc/Org/Articles/5TypesOpenSourceProjects is a nice reference). While contributions are often welcome and appreciated, not all features will be accepted (for example if the maintainer(s) feel they're out of scope or add too much complexity).

tildearrow (project author) holds full discretion over what goes into this repo, so please understand that there's <ins>no guarantee any PR will be accepted, or reviewed within a particular timeframe</ins>. That said, many great features/chips/fixes have come from the community, so please feel free to get involved!

# Other

## Getting ready

log into your Github account, and click the Fork button in the header of the project's page.

then open a terminal and clone your fork:

```
git clone git@github.com:USERNAME/furnace.git
```

(replace `USERNAME` with your username)

## Working

### Code

bug fixes, improvements and several other things accepted.

the coding style is described here:

- indentation: two spaces. **strictly** spaces. do NOT use tabs.
- modified 1TBS style:
  - no spaces in function calls
  - spaces between arguments in function declarations
  - no spaces in operations except for `||` and `&&`
  - no space between variable name and assignment
  - space between macro in string literals
  - space after comment delimiter
  - C++ pointer style: `void* variable` rather than `void *variable`
  - indent switch cases
  - preprocessor directives not intended
  - if macro comprises more than one line, indent
  - no new line after `template<>`
- do not use `_t` types, except for 64-bit integers and `size_t`.
- prefer built-in types:
  - `bool`
  - `signed char` or `unsigned char` are 8-bit
    - when the type is `char`, **always** specify whether it is signed or not.
    - unspecified `char` is signed on x86 and unsigned on ARM, so yeah.
    - the only situation in where unspecified `char` is allowed is for C strings (`const char*`).
  - `short` or `unsigned short` are 16-bit
  - `int` or `unsigned int` are 32-bit
  - `float` is 32-bit
  - `double` is 64-bit
  - `long long int` or `unsigned long long int` are 64-bit
    - avoid using 64-bit numbers as I still build for 32-bit systems.
    - two `long`s are required to make Windows happy.
    - prefer using `int64_t` or `uint64_t` for this specific case.
  - `size_t` are 32-bit or 64-bit, depending on architecture.
- in float/double operations, always use decimal and `f` if single-precision.
  - e.g. `1.0f` or `1.0` instead of `1`.
- prefer `NULL` over `nullptr` or any other proprietary null.
- only use `auto` if needed.
- avoid using `goto` unless absolutely required.
- use `String` for `std::string` (this is typedef'd in ta-utils.h).
- prefer using operator for String (std::string) comparisons (a=="").
- if you have to work with C strings, only use safe C string operations:
  - snprintf
  - strncpy
  - strncat
  - any other operation which specifies a limit

some files (particularly the ones in `src/engine/platform/sound` and `extern/`) don't follow this style.

you don't have to follow this style. I will fix it after I accept your contribution.

additional guidelines:

- in general **strongly** avoid breaking compatibility.
  - do not touch loadFur/saveFur unless you know what you're doing!
    - new fields must be at the end of each block to ensure forward compatibility
    - likewise, the instrument read/write functions in DivInstrument have to be handled carefully
    - any change to the format requires a version bump (see `src/engine/engine.h`).
    - do not bump the version number under any circumstances!
  - if you are making major changes to the playback routine, make sure to test with older songs to ensure nothing breaks.
    - I will run a test suite to make sure this is the case.
    - if something breaks, you might want to add a compatibility flag (this requires changing the format though).
- do not use `#pragma once`.
- do not memcmp() structs.
- on a switch block, **always** put `default` last and not in any other position.
  - I have fear of some C/C++ compilers ignoring the rest of cases upon hitting default.

### Do NOT Force-Push after submitting Pull Request

if you do so, your pull request will be closed.

### Demo Songs

just put your demo song in `demos/`! be noted there are some guidelines:

- avoid Nintendo song covers.
- avoid big label song covers.
- low effort compositions/covers may not be accepted at all.
- the following systems are not acceptable:
  - YMU759/MA-2: exists only for compatibility.
  - Pong: it is a joke system.
- the song shall be in Furnace file format.

## Finishing

after you've done your modifications, commit the changes and push.
then open your fork on GitHub and send a pull request.

## I don't know how to use Git but I want to contribute with a demo song

you can also contact me directly! [find me here.](https://tildearrow.org/?p=contact)
