# Microchip AY8930

a backwards-compatible successor to the AY-3-8910, with increased volume resolution, duty cycle control, three envelopes and highly configurable noise generator.

sadly, this soundchip has only ever observed minimal success, and has remained rather obscure since.
it is known for being used in the Covox Sound Master, which didn't sell well either.

emulation of this chip in Furnace is now complete thanks to community efforts and hardware testing, which an MSX board called Darky has permitted.

Furnace is able to do software PCM on AY8930, where all 3 channels can play 5-bit PCM samples (at the cost of a very high CPU usage).

## effects

- `12xx`: **set channel duty cycle.**
  - `0`: 3.125%
  - `1`: 6.25%
  - `2`: 12.5%
  - `3`: 25%
  - `4`: 50%
  - `5`: 75%
  - `6`: 87.5%
  - `7`: 93.75%
  - `8`: 96.875%
- `20xx`: **set channel mode.** `xx` may be one of the following:
  - `0`: square
  - `1`: noise
  - `2`: square and noise
  - `3`: envelope
  - `4`: envelope and square
  - `5`: envelope and noise
  - `6`: envelope and square and noise
  - `7`: nothing
- `21xx`: **set noise frequency.** `xx` is a value between `00` and `FF`.
- `22xy`: **set envelope mode.**
  - `x` sets the envelope shape, which may be one of the following:
    - `0`: `\___` decay
    - `4`: `/___` attack once
    - `8`: `\\\\` saw
    - `9`: `\___` decay
    - `A`: `\/\/` inverse obelisco
    - `B`: `\¯¯¯` decay once
    - `C`: `////` inverse saw
    - `D`: `/¯¯¯` attack
    - `E`: `/\/\` obelisco
    - `F`: `/___` attack once
  - if `y` is 1 then the envelope will affect this channel.
- `23xx`: **set envelope period low byte.**
- `24xx`: **set envelope period high byte.**
- `25xx`: **slide envelope period up.**
- `26xx`: **slide envelope period down.**
- `27xx`: **set noise AND mask.**
- `28xx`: **set noise OR mask.**
- `29xy`: **enable auto-envelope mode.**
  - in this mode the envelope period is set to the channel's notes, multiplied by a fraction.
  - `x` is the numerator.
  - `y` is the denominator.
  - if `x` or `y` are 0 this will disable auto-envelope mode.

## info

this chip uses the [AY8930](../4-instrument/ay8930.md) instrument editor.

## chip config

the following options are available in the Chip Manager window:

- **Clock rate**: sets the rate at which the chip will run.
- **Stereo**: enable stereo output. channel 1 is output left, channel 2 is output center and channel 3 is output right.
  - **Separation**: allows you to set left/right separation.
- **Half Clock divider**: pulls the half clock pin, running the chip at half the speed.
