po/README.md, before:

# po

these are language translation files for Furnace.

if you want to help translating Furnace to your language, read below.

# getting started

Furnace uses GNU gettext for language support.
it was chosen over other solutions due to notable advantages such as ease of use.

text strings in the source code are marked for translation with special delimiters.
afterwards, xgettext is used to extract these and generate a "template" file (furnace.pot) which contains all translatable strings.
some other tools are then used to generate new translation files (e.g. es.po for Spanish) or update them.
during build time, these translation files are converted into binary translation data which is then distributed in releases.

Furnace ships a script to help with the string extraction and translation file updating process.

# preparing

read the following instructions before you start working with translation files.

## preparing the environment

while you may edit translation files regardless of the employed method, setting them up (adding new languages, updating translation files or compiling these) is best done on a Linux environment with the GNU gettext tools installed.

if you use Windows, you may be able to perform setup through the Unix-like MSYS2 environment. see https://www.msys2.org/ for more information.

if you cannot/aren't willing to go through the process of preparing the environment, you may contact me so I can perform setup on my side and provide you with ready-to-edit translation files.

for the testing stage, Linux or Windows with MinGW (installed through the MSYS2 environment) is necessary. Visual Studio/MSVC is not supported yet.

## adding a new language

in order to add a new language, edit the setup script located in `scripts/update-po.sh`.
add a language code to the `EXPORT_LANGS` list (see `https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/IETF_language_tag` for a list of common language codes).
then run the script in your environment:

```
cd path/to/Furnace/repo
./scripts/update-po.sh
```

if successful, a new file will be created in the `po` directory that you can edit using a text editor.

be sure to edit CMakeLists.txt as well, to make sure the translation file is compiled. add the language code to `FURNACE_LANGUAGES`.

## editing an existing translation

just open the translation file in your text editor.

# translating

once you've opened the translation file, you'll see a bunch of strings that may be translated.

"msgid" is the original string in English, whereas "msgstr" is the translation. fill this in with a translated version of the English string.

the `#:` line at the top points to the source code file(s) where the string appears. you may use this if you need to understand which context is the string being used in.

if a string is marked with "c-format", it means the string contains C format codes. these codes consist of a percent sign (`%`) and a type (but don't worry too much about it).
make sure to place these format codes in the translated string appropriately, as if they were objects or subjects in a sentence.

sometimes you will see a string marked as "fuzzy" after running the setup script. if this appears, it means that it is a new string that looks like another. the translation is filled in automatically, but don't trust it as it's almost guaranteed to be wrong.

a `\n` means a line break.

# testing

you may skip this step if you don't feel like building Furnace, or are unable to.

compile Furnace (see the project's README.md file (the developer info section) for information), but in the CMake stage, be sure to pass the CMake flag `-DWITH_LOCALE=ON` before the two dots (`..`) to enable language support in Furnace and therefore compile translation files.

if you did this correctly, you will see a directory called `locale` in the build directory, containing compiled translation files (with `.mo` extension).

run Furnace from the build directory like so:

```
LANG=language-code ./furnace
```

replace `language-code` with the language code to use.

you should see Furnace start up in the language you specified. if it doesn't, check out the logs.

# submitting

after doing some work, be sure to submit it so you see it in the next version.

you can contact me via email or Discord (be sure to send the translation file), or alternatively send a pull request on GitHub. the latter is preferred if you're going to work frequently.

if sending a pull request, be sure to target the `locale` branch until I merge it into master.

that's all for now. thank you for helping translate Furnace, and good luck!

- tildearrow

# footnotes

## note 1

three languages are "special":

- Polish (`pl`)
- Portuguese (Brazil) (`pt_BR`)
- Russian (`ru`)

LTVA and some other people have done translation work on a fork of Furnace to these three languages, but instead of using gettext, they have deployed a custom gettext-like solution.

I will be porting these translations from the fork to upstream Furnace, but if you want to help, here are the translation files for these languages: `https://github.com/LTVA1/furnace/tree/master/src/locale`

thanks LTVA and everyone else for pioneering language support in Furnace!

## note 2

I also speak Spanish, which means I will be working on the Spanish translation.
however, you can work on it too in order to get it done faster. let me know though.

Commit message:

Fix up the po guide so U don't have to. (#1959)
* let there be zh_HK zh_CN

* fix the guide for U so you don't have to

* zh.po rev 0.2A added

* well, it's not needed to have it leak in to relase

po/README.md, after:

# po

these are GNU gettext Portable Objext language translation files for Furnace.

if you want to help translating Furnace to your language, read below.

# getting started

Furnace uses GNU gettext for language support.
it was chosen over other solutions due to notable advantages such as ease of use.

text strings in the source code are marked for translation with special delimiters.
afterwards, xgettext is used to extract these and generate a "template" file (furnace.pot) which contains all translatable strings.
some other tools are then used to generate new translation files (e.g. es.po for Spanish) or update them.
during build time, these translation files are converted into binary translation data which is then distributed in releases.

Furnace ships a script to help with the string extraction and translation file updating process.

# preparing

read the following instructions before you start working with translation files.

## preparing the environment

while you may edit translation files regardless of the employed method, setting them up (adding new languages, updating translation files or compiling these) is best done on a Linux environment with the GNU gettext tools installed.

if you use Windows, you may be able to perform setup through the Unix-like MSYS2 environment. see https://www.msys2.org/ for more information.

if you cannot/aren't willing to go through the process of preparing the environment, you may contact me so I can perform setup on my side and provide you with ready-to-edit translation files.

for the testing stage, Linux or Windows with MinGW (installed through the MSYS2 environment) is necessary. Visual Studio/MSVC is not supported yet.

## adding a new language

in order to add a new language, edit the setup script located in `scripts/update-po.sh`.
add a language code to the `EXPORT_LANGS` list (see `https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/IETF_language_tag` for a list of common language codes).
then run the script in your environment:

```
cd path/to/Furnace/repo
./scripts/update-po.sh
```

if successful, a new file (yourlangcode.po) will be created in the `po` directory that you can edit using a text editor.

## editing an existing translation

just open the translation file in your text editor.

# translating

once you've opened the translation file, you'll see a bunch of strings that may be translated.

"msgid" is the original string in English, whereas "msgstr" is the translation. fill this in with a translated version of the English string.

the `#:` line at the top points to the source code file(s) where the string appears. you may use this if you need to understand which context is the string being used in.

if a string is marked with "c-format", it means the string contains C format codes. these codes consist of a percent sign (`%`) and a type (but don't worry too much about it).
make sure to place these format codes in the translated string appropriately, as if they were objects or subjects in a sentence.

sometimes you will see a string marked as "fuzzy" after running the setup script. if this appears, it means that it is a new string that looks like another. the translation is filled in automatically, but don't trust it as it's almost guaranteed to be wrong.

a `\n` means a line break.

# compiling

To compile your .po file(s), run

```
cd path/to/Furnace/repo
./scripts/build-po.sh
```

to compile your .po file(s) into mo (Machine Object) file needed in actual furnace building process.

If you've encounter a error furing compiling, go to the line number retuned, modify, then try again.

if you did this correctly, you will see a directory called `locale` in the po/ directory, containing compiled translation files (with `.mo` extension).

# testing

you may skip this step if you don't feel like building Furnace, or are unable to.

compile Furnace (see the project's README.md file (the developer info section) for information), but in the CMake stage, be sure to pass the CMake flag `-DWITH_LOCALE=ON` before the two dots (`..`) to enable language support in Furnace and therefore compile translation files.


run Furnace from the build directory like so:

```
LANG=language-code ./furnace
```

replace `language-code` with the language code to use.

on linux (tested on ubuntu), you'll need to add .utf8 to language-code. (e.g. en_US.utf8)

you should see Furnace start up in the language you specified. if it doesn't, check out the logs.

# submitting

after doing some work, be sure to submit it so you see it in the next version.

you can contact me via email or Discord (be sure to send the translation file), or alternatively send a pull request on GitHub. the latter is preferred if you're going to work frequently.

if sending a pull request, be sure to target the `locale` branch until I merge it into master.

that's all for now. thank you for helping translate Furnace, and good luck!

- tildearrow

# footnotes

## note 1

three languages are "special":

- Polish (`pl`)
- Portuguese (Brazil) (`pt_BR`)
- Russian (`ru`)

LTVA and some other people have done translation work on a fork of Furnace to these three languages, but instead of using gettext, they have deployed a custom gettext-like solution.

I will be porting these translations from the fork to upstream Furnace, but if you want to help, here are the translation files for these languages: `https://github.com/LTVA1/furnace/tree/master/src/locale`

thanks LTVA and everyone else for pioneering language support in Furnace!

## note 2

I also speak Spanish, which means I will be working on the Spanish translation.
however, you can work on it too in order to get it done faster. let me know though.

## note 3

If you're translating ja ko zh_ , you need to make sure the 'LocaleSettings:' string in .po file set properly to enable the character set.

default LocaleSettings: ccjk

zh_CN: Ccjk
zh_HK: cCjk
ja_JP: ccJk
ko_KR: ccjK
