papers/newIns.md, before:

# new Furnace instrument format

the main issue with Furnace instrument files is that they are too big, even if the instrument is nothing more than the FM setup...

the aim of this new format is to greatly reduce the size of a resulting instrument.

# information

this format is "featural", meaning that only used parameters are stored (depending on instrument types).
this is the biggest improvement over the previous format, which stored everything including unused parameters.

features which are not recognized by Furnace will be ignored.

instruments are not compressed using zlib, unlike Furnace songs.

all numbers are little-endian.

the following fields may be found in "size":
- `f` indicates a floating point number.
- `STR` is a UTF-8 zero-terminated string.
- `???` is an array of variable size.
- `S??` is an array of `STR`s.
- `1??` is an array of bytes.
- `2??` is an array of shorts.
- `4??` is an array of ints.

the format may change across versions. a `(>=VER)` indicates this field is only present starting from format version `VER`, and `(<VER)` indicates this field is present only before version `VER`.

furthermore, an `or reserved` indicates this field is always present, but is reserved when the version condition is not met.

the `size of this block` fields represent the size of a block excluding the ID and the aforementioned field.

# header

.fui files use the following header:

```
size | description
-----|------------------------------------
  4  | "FINS" format magic
  2  | format version
  2  | instrument type
 ??? | features...
```

instruments in a .fur file use the following header instead:

```
size | description
-----|------------------------------------
  4  | "INS2" block ID
  4  | size of this block
  2  | format version
  2  | instrument type
 ??? | features...
```

a feature uses the following format:

```
size | description
-----|------------------------------------
  2  | feature code
  2  | length of block
 ??? | data...
```

the following instrument types are available:

- 0: SN76489
- 1: FM (OPN)
- 2: Game Boy
- 3: C64
- 4: Amiga/sample
- 5: PC Engine
- 6: AY-3-8910
- 7: AY8930
- 8: TIA
- 9: SAA1099
- 10: VIC
- 11: PET
- 12: VRC6
- 13: OPLL
- 14: OPL
- 15: FDS
- 16: Virtual Boy
- 17: Namco 163
- 18: SCC
- 19: OPZ
- 20: POKEY
- 21: PC Speaker
- 22: WonderSwan
- 23: Lynx
- 24: VERA
- 25: X1-010
- 26: VRC6 (saw)
- 27: ES5506
- 28: MultiPCM
- 29: SNES
- 30: Sound Unit
- 31: Namco WSG
- 32: OPL (drums)
- 33: FM (OPM)
- 34: NES
- 35: MSM6258
- 36: MSM6295
- 37: ADPCM-A
- 38: ADPCM-B
- 39: SegaPCM
- 40: QSound
- 41: YMZ280B
- 42: RF5C68
- 43: MSM5232
- 44: T6W28
- 45: K007232
- 46: GA20
- 47: Pokémon Mini/QuadTone
- 48: SM8521
- 49: PV-1000
- 50: K053260
- 52: TED
- 53: C140
- 54: C219
- 55: ESFM
- 56: PowerNoise (noise)
- 57: PowerNoise (slope)
- 58: Dave
- 59: NDS
- 60: GBA DMA
- 61: GBA MinMod
- 62: Bifurcator
- 63: SID2
- 64: Supervision
- 65: µPD1771C
- 66: SID3

the following feature codes are recognized:

- `NA`: instrument name
- `FM`: FM ins data
- `MA`: macro data
- `64`: C64 ins data
- `GB`: Game Boy ins data
- `SM`: sample ins data
- `O1`: operator 1 macros
- `O2`: operator 2 macros
- `O3`: operator 3 macros
- `O4`: operator 4 macros
- `LD`: OPL drums mode data
- `SN`: SNES ins data
- `N1`: Namco 163 ins data
- `FD`: FDS/Virtual Boy ins data
- `WS`: wavetable synth data
- `SL`: list of samples
- `WL`: list of wavetables
- `MP`: MultiPCM ins data
- `SU`: Sound Unit ins data
- `ES`: ES5506 ins data
- `X1`: X1-010 ins data
- `NE`: NES DPCM sample map data
- `EF`: ESFM ins data
- `PN`: PowerNoise ins data
- `S2`: SID2 ins data
- `S3`: SID3 ins data
- `EN`: end of features
  - if you find this feature code, stop reading the instrument.
  - it will usually appear only when there are sample/wave lists.
  - instruments in a .fur shall end with this feature code.

# instrument name (NA)

```
size | description
-----|------------------------------------
 STR | instrument name
```

# FM data (FM)

- FM operator order is:
  - 1/3/2/4 (internal order) for OPN, OPM, OPZ and OPL 4-op
  - 1/2/?/? (? = unused) for OPL 2-op and OPLL

```
size | description
-----|------------------------------------
  1  | flags
     | - bit 4-7: op enabled
     |   - op order from 4 to 7: 0, 2, 1, 3
     |   - 2-op instruments: 0, 1, x, x
     | - bit 0-3: op count
-----|------------------------------------
     | **base data**
     | /7 6 5 4 3 2 1 0|
  1  | |x| ALG |x| FB  |
  1  | |FMS2 |AMS| FMS |
  1  | |AM2|4| LLPatch |
  1  | |xxxxxxx| Block | (>=224)
-----|------------------------------------
     | **operator data × opCount**
     | /7 6 5 4 3 2 1 0|
  1  | |r| D T |  MULT |
     |  \- KSR
  1  | |s|     T L     |
     |  \- SUS
  1  | |R S|v|   A R   |
     |      \- VIB
  1  | |A|KSL|   D R   |
     |  \- AM
  1  | |e|KVS|   D2R   |
     |  \- EGT
  1  | |  S L  |  R R  |
  1  | |  DVB  |  SSG  |
  1  | | DAM |DT2| W S |
```

# macro data (MA)

notes:

- the macro range varies depending on the instrument type.
- "macro open" indicates whether the macro is collapsed or not in the instrument editor.
- meaning of extended macros varies depending on instrument type.
- meaning of panning macros varies depending on instrument type:
  - for hard-panned chips (e.g. FM and Game Boy): left panning is 2-bit panning macro (left/right)
  - otherwise both left and right panning macros are used

```
size | description
-----|------------------------------------
  2  | length of macro header
 ??? | data...
```

each macro is represented like this:

```
size | description
-----|------------------------------------
  1  | macro code
     | - 0: vol
     | - 1: arp
     | - 2: duty
     | - 3: wave
     | - 4: pitch
     | - 5: ex1
     | - 6: ex2
     | - 7: ex3
     | - 8: alg
     | - 9: fb
     | - 10: fms
     | - 11: ams
     | - 12: panL
     | - 13: panR
     | - 14: phaseReset
     | - 15: ex4
     | - 16: ex5
     | - 17: ex6
     | - 18: ex7
     | - 19: ex8
     | - 20: ex9
     | - 21: ex10
     | - 255: stop reading and move on
  1  | macro length
  1  | macro loop
  1  | macro release
  1  | macro mode
  1  | macro open/type/word size
     | - bit 6-7: word size
     |   - 0: 8-bit unsigned
     |   - 1: 8-bit signed
     |   - 2: 16-bit signed
     |   - 3: 32-bit signed
     | - bit 3: instant release (>=182)
     | - bit 1-2: type
     |   - 0: normal
     |   - 1: ADSR
     |   - 2: LFO
     | - bit 0: open
  1  | macro delay
  1  | macro speed
 ??? | macro data
     | - length: macro length × word size
```

## interpreting macro mode values

- sequence (normal): I think this is obvious...
- ADSR:
  - `val[0]`: bottom
  - `val[1]`: top
  - `val[2]`: attack
  - `val[3]`: hold time
  - `val[4]`: decay
  - `val[5]`: sustain level
  - `val[6]`: sustain hold time
  - `val[7]`: decay 2
  - `val[8]`: release
- LFO:
  - `val[11]`: speed
  - `val[12]`: waveform
    - 0: triangle
    - 1: saw
    - 2: pulse
  - `val[13]`: phase
  - `val[14]`: loop
  - `val[15]`: global (not sure how will I implement this)

# C64 data (64)

```
size | description
-----|------------------------------------
  1  | flags 1
     | - bit 7: dutyIsAbs
     | - bit 6: initFilter
     | - bit 5: volIsCutoff (<187)
     | - from version 187 onwards, volume and cutoff macros are separate.
     | - if this is on and the version is less than 187, move the volume macro into the ALG one.
     | - bit 4: toFilter
     | - bit 3: noise on
     | - bit 2: pulse on
     | - bit 1: saw on
     | - bit 0: triangle on
  1  | flags 2
     | - bit 7: oscSync
     | - bit 6: ringMod
     | - bit 5: noTest
     | - bit 4: filterIsAbs
     | - bit 3: ch3off
     | - bit 2: band pass
     | - bit 1: high pass
     | - bit 0: low pass
  1  | attack/decay
     | - bit 4-7: attack
     | - bit 0-3: decay
  1  | sustain release
     | - bit 4-7: sustain
     | - bit 0-3: release
  2  | duty
  2  | cutoff/resonance
     | - bit 12-15: resonance
     | - bit 0-10: cutoff (0-11 on SID2)
  1  | upper nibble of resonance (for SID2) (>=199)
     | - bits 0-3 hold this upper nibble
     | - bit 4: reset duty on new note (>=222)
```

## C64 compatibility note (>=187)

in Furnace dev187 the volume and cutoff macros have been separated, as noted above.
however, there are two other changes as well: **inverted relative (non-absolute) cutoff macro**; and a new, improved Special macro.

if version is less than 187, you must convert the Special macro:
1. do not continue if ex4 is not a Sequence type macro!
2. move bit 0 of ex4 macro data into bit 3.
3. set bit 0 on all steps of ex4 macro to 1.
4. if ex3 is not a Sequence type macro, stop here.
5. if ex3 macro length is 0, stop here.
6. merge the ex3 macro (former Special) into ex4 (former Test).
  - use the largest size (between ex3 and ex4).
  - if the ex3 macro is shorter than the ex4 one, use the last value of ex3, and vice-versa.
  - if the ex4 macro length is 0, expand it to the largest size, and set all steps to 1.

don't worry about loop or release...

# Game Boy data (GB)

```
size | description
-----|------------------------------------
  1  | envelope params
     | - bit 5-7: length
     | - bit 4: direction
     | - bit 0-3: volume
  1  | sound length
     | - 64 is infinity
  1  | flags
     | - bit 2: double wave width for GBA (>=196)
     | - bit 1: always init envelope
     | - bit 0: software envelope (zombie mode)
  1  | hardware sequence length
 ??? | hardware sequence...
     | - length: 3*hwSeqLen
```

a value in the hardware sequence has the following format:

```
size | description
-----|------------------------------------
  1  | command
     | - 0: set envelope
     | - 1: set sweep
     | - 2: wait
     | - 3: wait for release
     | - 4: loop
     | - 5: loop until release
  2  | data
     | - for set envelope:
     |   - 1 byte: parameter
     |     - bit 4-7: volume
     |     - bit 3: direction
     |     - bit 0-2: length
     |   - 1 byte: sound length
     | - for set sweep:
     |   - 1 byte: parameter
     |     - bit 4-6: length
     |     - bit 3: direction
     |     - bit 0-2: shift
     |   - 1 byte: nothing
     | - for wait:
     |   - 1 byte: length (in ticks)
     |   - 1 byte: nothing
     | - for wait for release:
     |   - 2 bytes: nothing
     | - for loop/loop until release:
     |   - 2 bytes: position
```

# sample ins data (SM)

```
size | description
-----|------------------------------------
  2  | initial sample
  1  | flags
     | - bit 2: use wave
     | - bit 1: use sample
     | - bit 0: use sample map
  1  | waveform length
 4?? | sample map... (120 entries)
     | - only read if sample map is enabled
```

the sample map format:

```
size | description
-----|------------------------------------
  2  | note to play (>=152) or reserved
  2  | sample to play
```

# operator macro data (O1, O2, O3 and O4)

similar to macro data, but using these macro codes:

- 0: AM
- 1: AR
- 2: DR
- 3: MULT
- 4: RR
- 5: SL
- 6: TL
- 7: DT2
- 8: RS
- 9: DT
- 10: D2R
- 11: SSG-EG
- 12: DAM
- 13: DVB
- 14: EGT
- 15: KSL
- 16: SUS
- 17: VIB
- 18: WS
- 19: KSR

# OPL drums mode data (LD)

```
size | description
-----|------------------------------------
  1  | fixed frequency mode
  2  | kick freq
  2  | snare/hat freq
  2  | tom/top freq
```

# SNES data (SN)

```
size | description
-----|------------------------------------
  1  | attack/decay
     | - bit 4-6: decay
     | - bit 0-3: attack
  1  | sustain/release
     | - bit 5-7: sustain
     | - bit 0-4: release
  1  | flags
     | - bit 4: envelope on
     | - bit 3: make sustain effective (<131)
     | - bit 0-2: gain mode
     |   - 0: direct
     |   - 4: dec
     |   - 5: exp
     |   - 6: inc
     |   - 7: bent
  1  | gain
  1  | decay 2/sustain mode (>=131)
     | - bit 5-6: sustain mode
     |   - 0: direct
     |   - 1: sustain (release with dec)
     |   - 2: sustain (release with exp)
     |   - 3: sustain (release with rel)
     | - bit 0-4: decay 2
```

# Namco 163 data (N1)

```
size | description
-----|------------------------------------
  4  | waveform
  1  | wave pos
  1  | wave len
  1  | wave mode
     | **extra info** (>=164)
  1  | enable per channel wave pos/len
  8  | per channel wave pos
     | - only read if enabled.
  8  | per channel wave len
     | - only read if enabled.
```

# FDS/Virtual Boy data (FD)

```
size | description
-----|------------------------------------
  4  | mod speed
  4  | mod depth
  1  | init mod table with first wave
 1?? | modulation table (32 entries)
```

# wavetable synth data (WS)

```
size | description
-----|------------------------------------
  4  | first wave
  4  | second wave
  1  | rate divider
  1  | effect
     | - bit 7: single or dual effect
  1  | enabled
  1  | global
  1  | speed (+1)
  1  | parameter 1
  1  | parameter 2
  1  | parameter 3
  1  | parameter 4
```

# list of samples (SL)

```
size | description
-----|------------------------------------
  1  | number of samples
 1?? | sample indexes...
 4?? | pointers to samples...
     | - these use the Furnace sample format.
```

# list of wavetables (WL)

```
size | description
-----|------------------------------------
  1  | number of wavetables
 1?? | wavetable indexes...
 4?? | pointers to wavetables...
     | - these use the Furnace wavetable format.
```

# MultiPCM data (MP)

```
size | description
-----|------------------------------------
  1  | attack rate
  1  | decay 1 rate
  1  | decay level
  1  | decay 2 rate
  1  | release rate
  1  | rate correction
  1  | LFO rate
  1  | vibrato depth
  1  | AM depth
  1  | flags (>=221)
     | - bit 0: damp
     | - bit 1: pseudo-reverb
     | - bit 2: LFO reset
     | - bit 3: level direct
```

# Sound Unit data (SU)

```
size | description
-----|------------------------------------
  1  | switch roles of phase reset timer and frequency
  1  | hardware sequence length (>=185)
 ??? | hardware sequence...
     | - length: 5*hwSeqLen
```

a value in the hardware sequence has the following format:

```
size | description
-----|------------------------------------
  1  | command
     | - 0: set volume sweep
     | - 1: set frequency sweep
     | - 2: set cutoff sweep
     | - 3: wait
     | - 4: wait for release
     | - 5: loop
     | - 6: loop until release
  1  | sweep bound
  1  | sweep amount/command data
     | - if "set sweep", this is amount.
     | - for wait: length in ticks
     | - for wait for release: nothing
     | - for loop/loop until release: position
  2  | sweep period
```

# ES5506 data (ES)

```
size | description
-----|------------------------------------
  1  | filter mode
     | - 0: HPK2_HPK2
     | - 1: HPK2_LPK1
     | - 2: LPK2_LPK2
     | - 3: LPK2_LPK1
  2  | K1
  2  | K2
  2  | envelope count
  1  | left volume ramp
  1  | right volume ramp
  1  | K1 ramp
  1  | K2 ramp
  1  | K1 slow
  1  | K2 slow
```

# X1-010 data (X1)

```
size | description
-----|------------------------------------
  4  | bank slot
```

# NES DPCM sample map data (NE)

```
size | description
-----|------------------------------------
  1  | use sample map
 2?? | DPCM sample map... (120 entries)
     | - only read if sample map is enabled
```

the DPCM sample map format:

```
size | description
-----|------------------------------------
  1  | pitch (0-15; otherwise no change)
  1  | delta counter value (0-127; otherwise no change)
```

if some fields are missing, that's because they are defined in the SM feature.
NES instruments with DPCM sample maps have both SM and NE features.

# PowerNoise data (PN)

```
size | description
-----|------------------------------------
  1  | octave
```

# SID2 data (S2)

```
size | description
-----|------------------------------------
  1  | parameters
     | - bit 6-7: noise mode
     | - bit 4-5: wave mix mode
     | - bit 0-3: volume
```

# SID3 data (S3)

```
size | description
-----|------------------------------------
  1  | flags 1
     | - bit 7: dutyIsAbs
     | - bit 3: noise on
     | - bit 2: pulse on
     | - bit 1: saw on
     | - bit 0: triangle on
  1  | attack
  1  | decay
  1  | sustain
  1  | sustain rate
  1  | release
  1  | wave mix mode
  2  | duty
  1  | flags 2
     | - bit 7: phase modulation
     | - bit 6: enable special wave
     | - bit 5: 1-bit noise
     | - bit 4: separate noise pitch
     | - bit 3: do wavetable
     | - bit 2: reset duty on new note
     | - bit 1: osc sync
     | - bit 0: ring mod
  1  | phase modulation source channel
  1  | ring modulation source channel
  1  | hard sync source channel
  1  | special wave
  1  | flags 3
     | - bit 1: left channel signal inversion
     | - bit 0: right channel signal inversion
  1  | feedback
  1  | number of filters
```

then, `number of filters` times, come settings for each filter:

```
size | description
-----|------------------------------------
  1  | parameters
     | - bit 7: enable filter
     | - bit 6: initialize filter
     | - bit 5: absolute cutoff macro
     | - bit 4: enable cutoff scaling
     | - bit 3: decrease cutoff when pitch increases (for cutoff scaling)
     | - bit 2: scale cutoff only once, on new note
     | - bit 1: enable resonance scaling
     | - bit 0: decrease resonance when pitch increases (for resonance scaling)
  1  | parameters
     | - bit 7: scale resonance only once, on new note
  2  | filter cutoff
  1  | filter resonance
  1  | filter output volume
  1  | filter distortion level
  1  | filter mode:
     | - bit 5: connect filter output to channel master output
     | - bit 4: connect filter input to channel ADSR output
     | - bit 2: band pass
     | - bit 1: high pass
     | - bit 0: low pass
  1  | matrix connection:
     | - bit 3: connect output of filter 4 to input
     | - bit 2: connect output of filter 3 to input
     | - bit 1: connect output of filter 2 to input
     | - bit 0: connect output of filter 1 to input
  1  | cutoff scaling level
  1  | cutoff scaling center note: `0` is `c_5`, `1` is `c+5`, ..., `179` is `B-9`
  1  | resonance scaling level
  1  | resonance scaling center note: `0` is `c_5`, `1` is `c+5`, ..., `179` is `B-9` 
```

Commit message:

dev233 - breaking the limit, part 1
now up to 32768 wavetables and 32768 samples

this is the first part and does not implement the new sample limit correctly
I have to adapt every dispatch to the new limit... see you in the next part

the format version had to be bumped because the WL and SL .fui features were limited to 256 entries
there are new LW and LS blocks with more space
howwver there's a new issue... we can have a feature larger than 65536, which is a limit imposed by the feature header :<
this will be addressed though

papers/newIns.md, after:

# new Furnace instrument format

the main issue with Furnace instrument files is that they are too big, even if the instrument is nothing more than the FM setup...

the aim of this new format is to greatly reduce the size of a resulting instrument.

# information

this format is "featural", meaning that only used parameters are stored (depending on instrument types).
this is the biggest improvement over the previous format, which stored everything including unused parameters.

features which are not recognized by Furnace will be ignored.

instruments are not compressed using zlib, unlike Furnace songs.

all numbers are little-endian.

the following fields may be found in "size":
- `f` indicates a floating point number.
- `STR` is a UTF-8 zero-terminated string.
- `???` is an array of variable size.
- `S??` is an array of `STR`s.
- `1??` is an array of bytes.
- `2??` is an array of shorts.
- `4??` is an array of ints.

the format may change across versions. a `(>=VER)` indicates this field is only present starting from format version `VER`, and `(<VER)` indicates this field is present only before version `VER`.

furthermore, an `or reserved` indicates this field is always present, but is reserved when the version condition is not met.

the `size of this block` fields represent the size of a block excluding the ID and the aforementioned field.

# header

.fui files use the following header:

```
size | description
-----|------------------------------------
  4  | "FINS" format magic
  2  | format version
  2  | instrument type
 ??? | features...
```

instruments in a .fur file use the following header instead:

```
size | description
-----|------------------------------------
  4  | "INS2" block ID
  4  | size of this block
  2  | format version
  2  | instrument type
 ??? | features...
```

a feature uses the following format:

```
size | description
-----|------------------------------------
  2  | feature code
  2  | length of block
 ??? | data...
```

the following instrument types are available:

- 0: SN76489
- 1: FM (OPN)
- 2: Game Boy
- 3: C64
- 4: Amiga/sample
- 5: PC Engine
- 6: AY-3-8910
- 7: AY8930
- 8: TIA
- 9: SAA1099
- 10: VIC
- 11: PET
- 12: VRC6
- 13: OPLL
- 14: OPL
- 15: FDS
- 16: Virtual Boy
- 17: Namco 163
- 18: SCC
- 19: OPZ
- 20: POKEY
- 21: PC Speaker
- 22: WonderSwan
- 23: Lynx
- 24: VERA
- 25: X1-010
- 26: VRC6 (saw)
- 27: ES5506
- 28: MultiPCM
- 29: SNES
- 30: Sound Unit
- 31: Namco WSG
- 32: OPL (drums)
- 33: FM (OPM)
- 34: NES
- 35: MSM6258
- 36: MSM6295
- 37: ADPCM-A
- 38: ADPCM-B
- 39: SegaPCM
- 40: QSound
- 41: YMZ280B
- 42: RF5C68
- 43: MSM5232
- 44: T6W28
- 45: K007232
- 46: GA20
- 47: Pokémon Mini/QuadTone
- 48: SM8521
- 49: PV-1000
- 50: K053260
- 52: TED
- 53: C140
- 54: C219
- 55: ESFM
- 56: PowerNoise (noise)
- 57: PowerNoise (slope)
- 58: Dave
- 59: NDS
- 60: GBA DMA
- 61: GBA MinMod
- 62: Bifurcator
- 63: SID2
- 64: Supervision
- 65: µPD1771C
- 66: SID3

the following feature codes are recognized:

- `NA`: instrument name
- `FM`: FM ins data
- `MA`: macro data
- `64`: C64 ins data
- `GB`: Game Boy ins data
- `SM`: sample ins data
- `O1`: operator 1 macros
- `O2`: operator 2 macros
- `O3`: operator 3 macros
- `O4`: operator 4 macros
- `LD`: OPL drums mode data
- `SN`: SNES ins data
- `N1`: Namco 163 ins data
- `FD`: FDS/Virtual Boy ins data
- `WS`: wavetable synth data
- `SL`: list of samples (<233)
- `WL`: list of wavetables (<233)
- `LS`: list of samples (>=233)
- `LW`: list of wavetables (>=233)
- `MP`: MultiPCM ins data
- `SU`: Sound Unit ins data
- `ES`: ES5506 ins data
- `X1`: X1-010 ins data
- `NE`: NES DPCM sample map data
- `EF`: ESFM ins data
- `PN`: PowerNoise ins data
- `S2`: SID2 ins data
- `S3`: SID3 ins data
- `EN`: end of features
  - if you find this feature code, stop reading the instrument.
  - it will usually appear only when there are sample/wave lists.
  - instruments in a .fur shall end with this feature code.

# instrument name (NA)

```
size | description
-----|------------------------------------
 STR | instrument name
```

# FM data (FM)

- FM operator order is:
  - 1/3/2/4 (internal order) for OPN, OPM, OPZ and OPL 4-op
  - 1/2/?/? (? = unused) for OPL 2-op and OPLL

```
size | description
-----|------------------------------------
  1  | flags
     | - bit 4-7: op enabled
     |   - op order from 4 to 7: 0, 2, 1, 3
     |   - 2-op instruments: 0, 1, x, x
     | - bit 0-3: op count
-----|------------------------------------
     | **base data**
     | /7 6 5 4 3 2 1 0|
  1  | |x| ALG |x| FB  |
  1  | |FMS2 |AMS| FMS |
  1  | |AM2|4| LLPatch |
  1  | |xxxxxxx| Block | (>=224)
-----|------------------------------------
     | **operator data × opCount**
     | /7 6 5 4 3 2 1 0|
  1  | |r| D T |  MULT |
     |  \- KSR
  1  | |s|     T L     |
     |  \- SUS
  1  | |R S|v|   A R   |
     |      \- VIB
  1  | |A|KSL|   D R   |
     |  \- AM
  1  | |e|KVS|   D2R   |
     |  \- EGT
  1  | |  S L  |  R R  |
  1  | |  DVB  |  SSG  |
  1  | | DAM |DT2| W S |
```

# macro data (MA)

notes:

- the macro range varies depending on the instrument type.
- "macro open" indicates whether the macro is collapsed or not in the instrument editor.
- meaning of extended macros varies depending on instrument type.
- meaning of panning macros varies depending on instrument type:
  - for hard-panned chips (e.g. FM and Game Boy): left panning is 2-bit panning macro (left/right)
  - otherwise both left and right panning macros are used

```
size | description
-----|------------------------------------
  2  | length of macro header
 ??? | data...
```

each macro is represented like this:

```
size | description
-----|------------------------------------
  1  | macro code
     | - 0: vol
     | - 1: arp
     | - 2: duty
     | - 3: wave
     | - 4: pitch
     | - 5: ex1
     | - 6: ex2
     | - 7: ex3
     | - 8: alg
     | - 9: fb
     | - 10: fms
     | - 11: ams
     | - 12: panL
     | - 13: panR
     | - 14: phaseReset
     | - 15: ex4
     | - 16: ex5
     | - 17: ex6
     | - 18: ex7
     | - 19: ex8
     | - 20: ex9
     | - 21: ex10
     | - 255: stop reading and move on
  1  | macro length
  1  | macro loop
  1  | macro release
  1  | macro mode
  1  | macro open/type/word size
     | - bit 6-7: word size
     |   - 0: 8-bit unsigned
     |   - 1: 8-bit signed
     |   - 2: 16-bit signed
     |   - 3: 32-bit signed
     | - bit 3: instant release (>=182)
     | - bit 1-2: type
     |   - 0: normal
     |   - 1: ADSR
     |   - 2: LFO
     | - bit 0: open
  1  | macro delay
  1  | macro speed
 ??? | macro data
     | - length: macro length × word size
```

## interpreting macro mode values

- sequence (normal): I think this is obvious...
- ADSR:
  - `val[0]`: bottom
  - `val[1]`: top
  - `val[2]`: attack
  - `val[3]`: hold time
  - `val[4]`: decay
  - `val[5]`: sustain level
  - `val[6]`: sustain hold time
  - `val[7]`: decay 2
  - `val[8]`: release
- LFO:
  - `val[11]`: speed
  - `val[12]`: waveform
    - 0: triangle
    - 1: saw
    - 2: pulse
  - `val[13]`: phase
  - `val[14]`: loop
  - `val[15]`: global (not sure how will I implement this)

# C64 data (64)

```
size | description
-----|------------------------------------
  1  | flags 1
     | - bit 7: dutyIsAbs
     | - bit 6: initFilter
     | - bit 5: volIsCutoff (<187)
     | - from version 187 onwards, volume and cutoff macros are separate.
     | - if this is on and the version is less than 187, move the volume macro into the ALG one.
     | - bit 4: toFilter
     | - bit 3: noise on
     | - bit 2: pulse on
     | - bit 1: saw on
     | - bit 0: triangle on
  1  | flags 2
     | - bit 7: oscSync
     | - bit 6: ringMod
     | - bit 5: noTest
     | - bit 4: filterIsAbs
     | - bit 3: ch3off
     | - bit 2: band pass
     | - bit 1: high pass
     | - bit 0: low pass
  1  | attack/decay
     | - bit 4-7: attack
     | - bit 0-3: decay
  1  | sustain release
     | - bit 4-7: sustain
     | - bit 0-3: release
  2  | duty
  2  | cutoff/resonance
     | - bit 12-15: resonance
     | - bit 0-10: cutoff (0-11 on SID2)
  1  | upper nibble of resonance (for SID2) (>=199)
     | - bits 0-3 hold this upper nibble
     | - bit 4: reset duty on new note (>=222)
```

## C64 compatibility note (>=187)

in Furnace dev187 the volume and cutoff macros have been separated, as noted above.
however, there are two other changes as well: **inverted relative (non-absolute) cutoff macro**; and a new, improved Special macro.

if version is less than 187, you must convert the Special macro:
1. do not continue if ex4 is not a Sequence type macro!
2. move bit 0 of ex4 macro data into bit 3.
3. set bit 0 on all steps of ex4 macro to 1.
4. if ex3 is not a Sequence type macro, stop here.
5. if ex3 macro length is 0, stop here.
6. merge the ex3 macro (former Special) into ex4 (former Test).
  - use the largest size (between ex3 and ex4).
  - if the ex3 macro is shorter than the ex4 one, use the last value of ex3, and vice-versa.
  - if the ex4 macro length is 0, expand it to the largest size, and set all steps to 1.

don't worry about loop or release...

# Game Boy data (GB)

```
size | description
-----|------------------------------------
  1  | envelope params
     | - bit 5-7: length
     | - bit 4: direction
     | - bit 0-3: volume
  1  | sound length
     | - 64 is infinity
  1  | flags
     | - bit 2: double wave width for GBA (>=196)
     | - bit 1: always init envelope
     | - bit 0: software envelope (zombie mode)
  1  | hardware sequence length
 ??? | hardware sequence...
     | - length: 3*hwSeqLen
```

a value in the hardware sequence has the following format:

```
size | description
-----|------------------------------------
  1  | command
     | - 0: set envelope
     | - 1: set sweep
     | - 2: wait
     | - 3: wait for release
     | - 4: loop
     | - 5: loop until release
  2  | data
     | - for set envelope:
     |   - 1 byte: parameter
     |     - bit 4-7: volume
     |     - bit 3: direction
     |     - bit 0-2: length
     |   - 1 byte: sound length
     | - for set sweep:
     |   - 1 byte: parameter
     |     - bit 4-6: length
     |     - bit 3: direction
     |     - bit 0-2: shift
     |   - 1 byte: nothing
     | - for wait:
     |   - 1 byte: length (in ticks)
     |   - 1 byte: nothing
     | - for wait for release:
     |   - 2 bytes: nothing
     | - for loop/loop until release:
     |   - 2 bytes: position
```

# sample ins data (SM)

```
size | description
-----|------------------------------------
  2  | initial sample
  1  | flags
     | - bit 2: use wave
     | - bit 1: use sample
     | - bit 0: use sample map
  1  | waveform length
 4?? | sample map... (120 entries)
     | - only read if sample map is enabled
```

the sample map format:

```
size | description
-----|------------------------------------
  2  | note to play (>=152) or reserved
  2  | sample to play
```

# operator macro data (O1, O2, O3 and O4)

similar to macro data, but using these macro codes:

- 0: AM
- 1: AR
- 2: DR
- 3: MULT
- 4: RR
- 5: SL
- 6: TL
- 7: DT2
- 8: RS
- 9: DT
- 10: D2R
- 11: SSG-EG
- 12: DAM
- 13: DVB
- 14: EGT
- 15: KSL
- 16: SUS
- 17: VIB
- 18: WS
- 19: KSR

# OPL drums mode data (LD)

```
size | description
-----|------------------------------------
  1  | fixed frequency mode
  2  | kick freq
  2  | snare/hat freq
  2  | tom/top freq
```

# SNES data (SN)

```
size | description
-----|------------------------------------
  1  | attack/decay
     | - bit 4-6: decay
     | - bit 0-3: attack
  1  | sustain/release
     | - bit 5-7: sustain
     | - bit 0-4: release
  1  | flags
     | - bit 4: envelope on
     | - bit 3: make sustain effective (<131)
     | - bit 0-2: gain mode
     |   - 0: direct
     |   - 4: dec
     |   - 5: exp
     |   - 6: inc
     |   - 7: bent
  1  | gain
  1  | decay 2/sustain mode (>=131)
     | - bit 5-6: sustain mode
     |   - 0: direct
     |   - 1: sustain (release with dec)
     |   - 2: sustain (release with exp)
     |   - 3: sustain (release with rel)
     | - bit 0-4: decay 2
```

# Namco 163 data (N1)

```
size | description
-----|------------------------------------
  4  | waveform
  1  | wave pos
  1  | wave len
  1  | wave mode
     | **extra info** (>=164)
  1  | enable per channel wave pos/len
  8  | per channel wave pos
     | - only read if enabled.
  8  | per channel wave len
     | - only read if enabled.
```

# FDS/Virtual Boy data (FD)

```
size | description
-----|------------------------------------
  4  | mod speed
  4  | mod depth
  1  | init mod table with first wave
 1?? | modulation table (32 entries)
```

# wavetable synth data (WS)

```
size | description
-----|------------------------------------
  4  | first wave
  4  | second wave
  1  | rate divider
  1  | effect
     | - bit 7: single or dual effect
  1  | enabled
  1  | global
  1  | speed (+1)
  1  | parameter 1
  1  | parameter 2
  1  | parameter 3
  1  | parameter 4
```

# old list of samples (SL) (<233)

```
size | description
-----|------------------------------------
  1  | number of samples
 1?? | sample indexes...
 4?? | pointers to samples...
     | - these use the Furnace sample format.
```

# old list of wavetables (WL) (<233)

```
size | description
-----|------------------------------------
  1  | number of wavetables
 1?? | wavetable indexes...
 4?? | pointers to wavetables...
     | - these use the Furnace wavetable format.
```

# new list of samples (LS) (>=233)

```
size | description
-----|------------------------------------
  2  | number of samples
 2?? | sample indexes...
 4?? | pointers to samples...
     | - these use the Furnace sample format.
```

# new list of wavetables (LW) (>=233)

```
size | description
-----|------------------------------------
  2  | number of wavetables
 2?? | wavetable indexes...
 4?? | pointers to wavetables...
     | - these use the Furnace wavetable format.
```

# MultiPCM data (MP)

```
size | description
-----|------------------------------------
  1  | attack rate
  1  | decay 1 rate
  1  | decay level
  1  | decay 2 rate
  1  | release rate
  1  | rate correction
  1  | LFO rate
  1  | vibrato depth
  1  | AM depth
  1  | flags (>=221)
     | - bit 0: damp
     | - bit 1: pseudo-reverb
     | - bit 2: LFO reset
     | - bit 3: level direct
```

# Sound Unit data (SU)

```
size | description
-----|------------------------------------
  1  | switch roles of phase reset timer and frequency
  1  | hardware sequence length (>=185)
 ??? | hardware sequence...
     | - length: 5*hwSeqLen
```

a value in the hardware sequence has the following format:

```
size | description
-----|------------------------------------
  1  | command
     | - 0: set volume sweep
     | - 1: set frequency sweep
     | - 2: set cutoff sweep
     | - 3: wait
     | - 4: wait for release
     | - 5: loop
     | - 6: loop until release
  1  | sweep bound
  1  | sweep amount/command data
     | - if "set sweep", this is amount.
     | - for wait: length in ticks
     | - for wait for release: nothing
     | - for loop/loop until release: position
  2  | sweep period
```

# ES5506 data (ES)

```
size | description
-----|------------------------------------
  1  | filter mode
     | - 0: HPK2_HPK2
     | - 1: HPK2_LPK1
     | - 2: LPK2_LPK2
     | - 3: LPK2_LPK1
  2  | K1
  2  | K2
  2  | envelope count
  1  | left volume ramp
  1  | right volume ramp
  1  | K1 ramp
  1  | K2 ramp
  1  | K1 slow
  1  | K2 slow
```

# X1-010 data (X1)

```
size | description
-----|------------------------------------
  4  | bank slot
```

# NES DPCM sample map data (NE)

```
size | description
-----|------------------------------------
  1  | use sample map
 2?? | DPCM sample map... (120 entries)
     | - only read if sample map is enabled
```

the DPCM sample map format:

```
size | description
-----|------------------------------------
  1  | pitch (0-15; otherwise no change)
  1  | delta counter value (0-127; otherwise no change)
```

if some fields are missing, that's because they are defined in the SM feature.
NES instruments with DPCM sample maps have both SM and NE features.

# PowerNoise data (PN)

```
size | description
-----|------------------------------------
  1  | octave
```

# SID2 data (S2)

```
size | description
-----|------------------------------------
  1  | parameters
     | - bit 6-7: noise mode
     | - bit 4-5: wave mix mode
     | - bit 0-3: volume
```

# SID3 data (S3)

```
size | description
-----|------------------------------------
  1  | flags 1
     | - bit 7: dutyIsAbs
     | - bit 3: noise on
     | - bit 2: pulse on
     | - bit 1: saw on
     | - bit 0: triangle on
  1  | attack
  1  | decay
  1  | sustain
  1  | sustain rate
  1  | release
  1  | wave mix mode
  2  | duty
  1  | flags 2
     | - bit 7: phase modulation
     | - bit 6: enable special wave
     | - bit 5: 1-bit noise
     | - bit 4: separate noise pitch
     | - bit 3: do wavetable
     | - bit 2: reset duty on new note
     | - bit 1: osc sync
     | - bit 0: ring mod
  1  | phase modulation source channel
  1  | ring modulation source channel
  1  | hard sync source channel
  1  | special wave
  1  | flags 3
     | - bit 1: left channel signal inversion
     | - bit 0: right channel signal inversion
  1  | feedback
  1  | number of filters
```

then, `number of filters` times, come settings for each filter:

```
size | description
-----|------------------------------------
  1  | parameters
     | - bit 7: enable filter
     | - bit 6: initialize filter
     | - bit 5: absolute cutoff macro
     | - bit 4: enable cutoff scaling
     | - bit 3: decrease cutoff when pitch increases (for cutoff scaling)
     | - bit 2: scale cutoff only once, on new note
     | - bit 1: enable resonance scaling
     | - bit 0: decrease resonance when pitch increases (for resonance scaling)
  1  | parameters
     | - bit 7: scale resonance only once, on new note
  2  | filter cutoff
  1  | filter resonance
  1  | filter output volume
  1  | filter distortion level
  1  | filter mode:
     | - bit 5: connect filter output to channel master output
     | - bit 4: connect filter input to channel ADSR output
     | - bit 2: band pass
     | - bit 1: high pass
     | - bit 0: low pass
  1  | matrix connection:
     | - bit 3: connect output of filter 4 to input
     | - bit 2: connect output of filter 3 to input
     | - bit 1: connect output of filter 2 to input
     | - bit 0: connect output of filter 1 to input
  1  | cutoff scaling level
  1  | cutoff scaling center note: `0` is `c_5`, `1` is `c+5`, ..., `179` is `B-9`
  1  | resonance scaling level
  1  | resonance scaling center note: `0` is `c_5`, `1` is `c+5`, ..., `179` is `B-9` 
```
