doc/3-pattern/effects.md, before:

# effect list

some of the effect numbers are taken from ProTracker / FastTracker 2.

however, effects are continuous (unless specified), which means you only need to type it once and then stop it with an effect value of `00` or no effect value at all.

## volume

- `0Axy`: **Volume slide.**
  - if `x` is 0 then this slides volume down by `y` each tick.
  - if `y` is 0 then this slides volume up by `x` each tick.
- `FAxy`: **Fast volume slide.** same as `0Axy` above but 4× faster.
- `F3xx`: **Fine volume slide up.** same as `0Ax0` but 64× slower.
- `F4xx`: **Fine volume slide down.** same as `0A0x` but 64× slower.
- `F8xx`: **Single tick volume up.** adds `x` to volume.
- `F9xx`: **Single tick volume down.** subtracts `x` from volume.
  - ---
- `D3xx`: **Volume portamento.** slides the volume to the one specified in the volume column. `x` is the slide speed.
  - a volume _must_ be present with this effect for it to work.
- `D4xx`: **Volume portamento (fast).** like `D3xx` but 4× faster.
  - ---
- `07xy`: **Tremolo.** changes volume to be "wavy" with a sine LFO. `x` is the speed. `y` is the depth.
  - tremolo is downward only.
  - maximum tremolo depth is -60 volume steps.
  - ---
- `DCxx`: **Delayed mute.** sets channel volume to 0 after `xx` ticks.

## pitch

- `E5xx`: **Set pitch.** `00` is -1 semitone, `80` is base pitch, `FF` is nearly +1 semitone.
- `01xx`: **Pitch slide up.**
- `02xx`: **Pitch slide down.**
- `F1xx`: **Single tick pitch up.**
- `F2xx`: **Single tick pitch down.**
  - ---
- `03xx`: **Portamento.** slides the currently playing note's pitch toward the new note. `x` is the slide speed.
  - a note _must_ be present with this effect for it to work.
  - the effect stops automatically when it reaches the new note.
- `E1xy`: **Note slide up.** `x` is the speed, while `y` is how many semitones to slide up.
- `E2xy`: **Note slide down.** `x` is the speed, while `y` is how many semitones to slide down.
  - ---
- `EAxx`: **Toggle legato.** while on, new notes instantly change the pitch of the currently playing sound instead of starting it over.
- `E6xy`: **Quick legato (compatibility).** transposes note by `y` semitones after `x` ticks.
  - if `x` is between 0 and 7, it transposes up.
  - if `x` is between 8 and F, it transposes down.
- `E8xy`: **Quick legato up**. transposes note up by `y` semitones after `x` ticks.
- `E9xy`: **Quick legato down**. transposes note down by `y` semitones after `x` ticks.
- `00xy`: **Arpeggio.** this effect produces a rapid cycle between the current note, the note plus `x` semitones and the note plus `y` semitones.
  - as an example, start with a chord of C-3, G-3, and D#4. the G-3 and D#4 are 7 and 15 semitones higher than the root note, so the corresponding effect is `007F`.
- `E0xx`: **Set arpeggio speed.** this sets the number of ticks between arpeggio values. default is 1.
  - ---
- `04xy`: **Vibrato.** makes the pitch oscillate. `x` is the speed, while `y` is the depth.
  - maximum vibrato depth is ±1 semitone.
- `E3xx`: **Set vibrato shape.** `xx` may be one of the following:
  - `00`: sine (default)
  - `01`: sine (upper portion only)
  - `02`: sine (lower portion only)
  - `03`: triangle
  - `04`: ramp up
  - `05`: ramp down
  - `06`: square
  - `07`: random
  - `08`: square (up)
  - `09`: square (down)
  - `0a`: half sine (up)
  - `0b`: half sine (down)
- `E4xx`: **Set vibrato range** in 1/16th of a semitone. 

## panning

not all chips support these effects.

- `08xy`: **Set panning.** changes stereo volumes independently. `x` is the left channel and `y` is the right one.
- `88xy`: **Set rear panning.** changes rear channel volumes independently. `x` is the rear left channel and `y` is the rear right one.
- `81xx`: **Set volume of left channel** (from `00` to `FF`).
- `82xx`: **Set volume of right channel** (from `00` to `FF`).
- `89xx`: **Set volume of rear left channel** (from `00` to `FF`).
- `8Axx`: **Set volume of rear right channel** (from `00` to `FF`).
  - ---
- `80xx`: **Set panning (linear).** this effect behaves more like other trackers:
  - `00` is left.
  - `80` is center.
  - `FF` is right.
  - ---
- `83xy`: **Panning slide.**
  - if `y` is 0 then this pans to the left by `x` each tick.
  - if `x` is 0 then this pans to the right by `y` each tick.
  - be noted that panning macros override this effect.
- `84xy`: **Panbrello.** makes panning oscillate. `x` is the speed, while `y` is the depth.
  - be noted that panning macros override this effect.

## time

- `09xx`: **Set speed/groove.** if no grooves are defined, this sets speed. if alternating speeds are active, this sets the first speed.
- `0Fxx`: **Set speed 2.** during alternating speeds or a groove, this sets the second speed.
  - ---
- `Cxxx`: **Set tick rate.** changes tick rate to `xxx` Hz (ticks per second).
  - `xxx` may be from `000` to `3FF`.
- `F0xx`: **Set BPM.** changes tick rate according to beats per minute. range is `01` to `FF`.
  - ---
- `FDxx`: **Set virtual tempo numerator.** sets the virtual tempo's numerator to the effect value.
- `FExx`: **Set virtual tempo denominator.** sets the virtual tempo's denominator to the effect value.
  - ---
- `0Bxx`: **Jump to order.** `x` is the order to play after the current row.
  - this marks the end of a loop with order `x` as the loop start.
- `0Dxx`: **Jump to next pattern.** skips the current row and remainder of current order. `x` is the row at which to start playing the next pattern.
  - this can be used to shorten the current order as though it had a different pattern length.
- `FFxx`: **Stop song.** stops playback and ends the song. `x` is ignored.

## note

- `0Cxx`: **Retrigger.** repeats current note every `xx` ticks.
  - this effect is not continuous; it must be entered on every row.
- `ECxx`: **Note cut.** triggers note off after `xx` ticks. this triggers key off in FM/hardware envelope chips, or cuts note otherwise.
- `EDxx`: **Note delay.** delays note by `x` ticks.
- `FCxx`: **Note release.** releases current note after `xx` ticks. this releases macros and triggers key off in FM/hardware envelope chips.
- `E7xx`: **Macro release.** releases macros after `xx` ticks. this does not trigger key off.

## sample offset

these effects make the current playing sample on the channel jump to a specific position.
only some chips support this effect.

sample offset is a 24-bit (3 byte) number.

- `90xx`: **Set sample offset (first byte).**
- `91xx`: **Set sample offset (second byte).**
- `92xx`: **Set sample offset (third byte).**

you may use these effects simultaneously in a row.

if you do not set a byte, its last value will be used.

in previous versions of Furnace a `9xxx` effect existed which set the sample position to `$xxx00` (`xxx` was effectively multiplied by 256). this maps to `920x 91xx` in current Furnace.

## other

- `EBxx`: **Set LEGACY sample mode bank.** selects sample bank. used only for compatibility.
  - does not apply on Amiga.
- `EExx`: **Send external command.**
  - this effect is currently incomplete.
- `F5xx`: **Disable macro.**
- `F6xx`: **Enable macro.**
- `F7xx`: **Restart macro.**
  - see macro table at the end of this document for possible values.

additionally, [each chip has its own effects](../7-systems/README.md).

## macro table

 ID  | macro
-----|-----------------------------
`00` | volume
`01` | arpeggio
`02` | duty/noise
`03` | waveform
`04` | pitch
`05` | extra 1
`06` | extra 2
`07` | extra 3
`08` | extra A (ALG)
`09` | extra B (FM)
`0A` | extra C (FMS)
`0B` | extra D (AMS)
`0C` | panning left
`0D` | panning right
`0E` | phase reset
`0F` | extra 4
`10` | extra 5
`11` | extra 6
`12` | extra 7
`13` | extra 8
|    | **operator 1 macros**
`20` | AM
`21` | AR
`22` | DR
`23` | MULT
`24` | RR
`25` | SL
`26` | TL
`27` | DT2
`28` | RS
`29` | DT
`2A` | D2R
`2B` | SSG-EG
`2C` | DAM
`2D` | DVB
`2E` | EGT
`2F` | KSL
`30` | SUS
`31` | VIB
`32` | WS
`33` | KSR
`40` | **operator 2 macros**
`60` | **operator 3 macros**
`80` | **operator 4 macros**

the interpretation of duty, wave and extra macros depends on chip/instrument type:

ex | FM     | OPM       | OPZ       | OPLL  | AY-3-8910  | AY8930     | Lynx     | C64        |
---|--------|-----------|-----------|-------|------------|------------|----------|------------|
 D | NoiseF | NoiseFreq |           |       | NoiseFreq  | NoiseFreq  | Duty/Int | Duty       |
 W |        | LFO Shape | LFO Shape | Patch | Waveform   | Waveform   |          | Waveform   |
 1 |        | AMD       | AMD       |       |            | Duty       |          | FilterMode |
 2 |        | PMD       | PMD       |       | Envelope   | Envelope   |          | Resonance  |
 3 | LFOSpd | LFO Speed | LFO Speed |       | AutoEnvNum | AutoEnvNum |          |            |
 A | ALG    | ALG       | ALG       |       | AutoEnvDen | AutoEnvDen |          | Cutoff     |
 B | FB     | FB        | FB        |       |            | Noise AND  |          |            |
 C | FMS    | FMS       | FMS       |       |            | Noise OR   |          |            |
 D | AMS    | AMS       | AMS       |       |            |            |          |            |
 4 | OpMask | OpMask    |           |       |            |            |          | Special    |
 5 |        |           | AMD2      |       |            |            |          | Attack     |
 6 |        |           | PMD2      |       |            |            |          | Decay      |
 7 |        |           | LFO2Speed |       |            |            |          | Sustain    |
 8 |        |           | LFO2Shape |       |            |            |          | Release    |

ex | SAA1099  | X1-010     | Namco 163  | FDS       | Sound Unit | ES5506    | MSM6258  |
---|----------|------------|------------|-----------|------------|-----------|----------|
 D |          |            | Wave Pos   |           | Duty       | Filt Mode | FreqDiv  |
 W | Waveform | Waveform   | Waveform   | Waveform  | Waveform   |           |          |
 1 | Envelope | EnvMode    | WaveLen    | Mod Depth | Cutoff     | Filter K1 | ClockDiv |
 2 |          | Envelope   | WaveUpdate | Mod Speed | Resonance  | Filter K2 |          |
 3 |          | AutoEnvNum | WaveLoad W |           | Control    | Env Count |          |
 A |          | AutoEnvDen | WaveLoad P |           |            | Control   |          |
 B |          |            | WaveLoad L |           |            |           |          |
 C |          |            | WaveLoad T |           |            |           |          |
 D |          |            |            |           |            |           |          |
 4 |          |            |            |           | PResetTime | EnvRampL  |          |
 5 |          |            |            |           |            | EnvRampR  |          |
 6 |          |            |            |           |            | EnvRampK1 |          |
 7 |          |            |            |           |            | EnvRampK2 |          |
 8 |          |            |            |           |            | Env Mode  |          |

ex | QSound       | SNES      | MSM5232   |
---|--------------|-----------|-----------|
 D | Echo Level   | NoiseFreq | GroupCtrl |
 W |              | Waveform  |           |
 1 | EchoFeedback | Special   | GroupAtk  |
 2 | Echo Length  | Gain      | GroupDec  |
 3 |              |           | Noise     |
 A |              |           |           |
 B |              |           |           |
 C |              |           |           |
 D |              |           |           |
 4 |              |           |           |
 5 |              |           |           |
 6 |              |           |           |
 7 |              |           |           |
 8 |              |           |           |

Commit message:

update D4xx to be slower
previously D4xx slide speed matched FAxy, but given that D4 effect values can be over 16x larger than FAxy values, it lacked in resolution, with most of its range consumed in not-so-useful values.

now D410 matches FA01/FA10, so it's familiar and has the same range as
FAxy, while still having 4x the resolution of 0Axy. this is accomplished
by having D4 give 4x the speed of D3.

doc/3-pattern/effects.md, after:

# effect list

some of the effect numbers are taken from ProTracker / FastTracker 2.

however, effects are continuous (unless specified), which means you only need to type it once and then stop it with an effect value of `00` or no effect value at all.

## volume

- `0Axy`: **Volume slide.**
  - if `x` is 0 then this slides volume down by `y` each tick.
  - if `y` is 0 then this slides volume up by `x` each tick.
- `FAxy`: **Fast volume slide.** same as `0Axy` above but 4× faster.
- `F3xx`: **Fine volume slide up.** same as `0Ax0` but 64× slower.
- `F4xx`: **Fine volume slide down.** same as `0A0x` but 64× slower.
- `F8xx`: **Single tick volume up.** adds `x` to volume.
- `F9xx`: **Single tick volume down.** subtracts `x` from volume.
  - ---
- `D3xx`: **Volume portamento (fine).** slides the volume to the value specified in the volume column. `x` is the slide speed, in units identical to those used by `F3xx`/`F4xx` (fine volume slide up/down).
  - a volume _must_ be present with this effect for it to work.
- `D4xx`: **Volume portamento.** same as `D3xx` but 16× faster. (i.e. `D4F0` is the same speed as `FA0F`/`FAF0`).
  - ---
- `07xy`: **Tremolo.** changes volume to be "wavy" with a sine LFO. `x` is the speed. `y` is the depth.
  - tremolo is downward only.
  - maximum tremolo depth is -60 volume steps.
  - ---
- `DCxx`: **Delayed mute.** sets channel volume to 0 after `xx` ticks.

## pitch

- `E5xx`: **Set pitch.** `00` is -1 semitone, `80` is base pitch, `FF` is nearly +1 semitone.
- `01xx`: **Pitch slide up.**
- `02xx`: **Pitch slide down.**
- `F1xx`: **Single tick pitch up.**
- `F2xx`: **Single tick pitch down.**
  - ---
- `03xx`: **Portamento.** slides the currently playing note's pitch toward the new note. `x` is the slide speed.
  - a note _must_ be present with this effect for it to work.
  - the effect stops automatically when it reaches the new note.
- `E1xy`: **Note slide up.** `x` is the speed, while `y` is how many semitones to slide up.
- `E2xy`: **Note slide down.** `x` is the speed, while `y` is how many semitones to slide down.
  - ---
- `EAxx`: **Toggle legato.** while on, new notes instantly change the pitch of the currently playing sound instead of starting it over.
- `E6xy`: **Quick legato (compatibility).** transposes note by `y` semitones after `x` ticks.
  - if `x` is between 0 and 7, it transposes up.
  - if `x` is between 8 and F, it transposes down.
- `E8xy`: **Quick legato up**. transposes note up by `y` semitones after `x` ticks.
- `E9xy`: **Quick legato down**. transposes note down by `y` semitones after `x` ticks.
- `00xy`: **Arpeggio.** this effect produces a rapid cycle between the current note, the note plus `x` semitones and the note plus `y` semitones.
  - as an example, start with a chord of C-3, G-3, and D#4. the G-3 and D#4 are 7 and 15 semitones higher than the root note, so the corresponding effect is `007F`.
- `E0xx`: **Set arpeggio speed.** this sets the number of ticks between arpeggio values. default is 1.
  - ---
- `04xy`: **Vibrato.** makes the pitch oscillate. `x` is the speed, while `y` is the depth.
  - maximum vibrato depth is ±1 semitone.
- `E3xx`: **Set vibrato shape.** `xx` may be one of the following:
  - `00`: sine (default)
  - `01`: sine (upper portion only)
  - `02`: sine (lower portion only)
  - `03`: triangle
  - `04`: ramp up
  - `05`: ramp down
  - `06`: square
  - `07`: random
  - `08`: square (up)
  - `09`: square (down)
  - `0a`: half sine (up)
  - `0b`: half sine (down)
- `E4xx`: **Set vibrato range** in 1/16th of a semitone. 

## panning

not all chips support these effects.

- `08xy`: **Set panning.** changes stereo volumes independently. `x` is the left channel and `y` is the right one.
- `88xy`: **Set rear panning.** changes rear channel volumes independently. `x` is the rear left channel and `y` is the rear right one.
- `81xx`: **Set volume of left channel** (from `00` to `FF`).
- `82xx`: **Set volume of right channel** (from `00` to `FF`).
- `89xx`: **Set volume of rear left channel** (from `00` to `FF`).
- `8Axx`: **Set volume of rear right channel** (from `00` to `FF`).
  - ---
- `80xx`: **Set panning (linear).** this effect behaves more like other trackers:
  - `00` is left.
  - `80` is center.
  - `FF` is right.
  - ---
- `83xy`: **Panning slide.**
  - if `y` is 0 then this pans to the left by `x` each tick.
  - if `x` is 0 then this pans to the right by `y` each tick.
  - be noted that panning macros override this effect.
- `84xy`: **Panbrello.** makes panning oscillate. `x` is the speed, while `y` is the depth.
  - be noted that panning macros override this effect.

## time

- `09xx`: **Set speed/groove.** if no grooves are defined, this sets speed. if alternating speeds are active, this sets the first speed.
- `0Fxx`: **Set speed 2.** during alternating speeds or a groove, this sets the second speed.
  - ---
- `Cxxx`: **Set tick rate.** changes tick rate to `xxx` Hz (ticks per second).
  - `xxx` may be from `000` to `3FF`.
- `F0xx`: **Set BPM.** changes tick rate according to beats per minute. range is `01` to `FF`.
  - ---
- `FDxx`: **Set virtual tempo numerator.** sets the virtual tempo's numerator to the effect value.
- `FExx`: **Set virtual tempo denominator.** sets the virtual tempo's denominator to the effect value.
  - ---
- `0Bxx`: **Jump to order.** `x` is the order to play after the current row.
  - this marks the end of a loop with order `x` as the loop start.
- `0Dxx`: **Jump to next pattern.** skips the current row and remainder of current order. `x` is the row at which to start playing the next pattern.
  - this can be used to shorten the current order as though it had a different pattern length.
- `FFxx`: **Stop song.** stops playback and ends the song. `x` is ignored.

## note

- `0Cxx`: **Retrigger.** repeats current note every `xx` ticks.
  - this effect is not continuous; it must be entered on every row.
- `ECxx`: **Note cut.** triggers note off after `xx` ticks. this triggers key off in FM/hardware envelope chips, or cuts note otherwise.
- `EDxx`: **Note delay.** delays note by `x` ticks.
- `FCxx`: **Note release.** releases current note after `xx` ticks. this releases macros and triggers key off in FM/hardware envelope chips.
- `E7xx`: **Macro release.** releases macros after `xx` ticks. this does not trigger key off.

## sample offset

these effects make the current playing sample on the channel jump to a specific position.
only some chips support this effect.

sample offset is a 24-bit (3 byte) number.

- `90xx`: **Set sample offset (first byte).**
- `91xx`: **Set sample offset (second byte).**
- `92xx`: **Set sample offset (third byte).**

you may use these effects simultaneously in a row.

if you do not set a byte, its last value will be used.

in previous versions of Furnace a `9xxx` effect existed which set the sample position to `$xxx00` (`xxx` was effectively multiplied by 256). this maps to `920x 91xx` in current Furnace.

## other

- `EBxx`: **Set LEGACY sample mode bank.** selects sample bank. used only for compatibility.
  - does not apply on Amiga.
- `EExx`: **Send external command.**
  - this effect is currently incomplete.
- `F5xx`: **Disable macro.**
- `F6xx`: **Enable macro.**
- `F7xx`: **Restart macro.**
  - see macro table at the end of this document for possible values.

additionally, [each chip has its own effects](../7-systems/README.md).

## macro table

 ID  | macro
-----|-----------------------------
`00` | volume
`01` | arpeggio
`02` | duty/noise
`03` | waveform
`04` | pitch
`05` | extra 1
`06` | extra 2
`07` | extra 3
`08` | extra A (ALG)
`09` | extra B (FM)
`0A` | extra C (FMS)
`0B` | extra D (AMS)
`0C` | panning left
`0D` | panning right
`0E` | phase reset
`0F` | extra 4
`10` | extra 5
`11` | extra 6
`12` | extra 7
`13` | extra 8
|    | **operator 1 macros**
`20` | AM
`21` | AR
`22` | DR
`23` | MULT
`24` | RR
`25` | SL
`26` | TL
`27` | DT2
`28` | RS
`29` | DT
`2A` | D2R
`2B` | SSG-EG
`2C` | DAM
`2D` | DVB
`2E` | EGT
`2F` | KSL
`30` | SUS
`31` | VIB
`32` | WS
`33` | KSR
`40` | **operator 2 macros**
`60` | **operator 3 macros**
`80` | **operator 4 macros**

the interpretation of duty, wave and extra macros depends on chip/instrument type:

ex | FM     | OPM       | OPZ       | OPLL  | AY-3-8910  | AY8930     | Lynx     | C64        |
---|--------|-----------|-----------|-------|------------|------------|----------|------------|
 D | NoiseF | NoiseFreq |           |       | NoiseFreq  | NoiseFreq  | Duty/Int | Duty       |
 W |        | LFO Shape | LFO Shape | Patch | Waveform   | Waveform   |          | Waveform   |
 1 |        | AMD       | AMD       |       |            | Duty       |          | FilterMode |
 2 |        | PMD       | PMD       |       | Envelope   | Envelope   |          | Resonance  |
 3 | LFOSpd | LFO Speed | LFO Speed |       | AutoEnvNum | AutoEnvNum |          |            |
 A | ALG    | ALG       | ALG       |       | AutoEnvDen | AutoEnvDen |          | Cutoff     |
 B | FB     | FB        | FB        |       |            | Noise AND  |          |            |
 C | FMS    | FMS       | FMS       |       |            | Noise OR   |          |            |
 D | AMS    | AMS       | AMS       |       |            |            |          |            |
 4 | OpMask | OpMask    |           |       |            |            |          | Special    |
 5 |        |           | AMD2      |       |            |            |          | Attack     |
 6 |        |           | PMD2      |       |            |            |          | Decay      |
 7 |        |           | LFO2Speed |       |            |            |          | Sustain    |
 8 |        |           | LFO2Shape |       |            |            |          | Release    |

ex | SAA1099  | X1-010     | Namco 163  | FDS       | Sound Unit | ES5506    | MSM6258  |
---|----------|------------|------------|-----------|------------|-----------|----------|
 D |          |            | Wave Pos   |           | Duty       | Filt Mode | FreqDiv  |
 W | Waveform | Waveform   | Waveform   | Waveform  | Waveform   |           |          |
 1 | Envelope | EnvMode    | WaveLen    | Mod Depth | Cutoff     | Filter K1 | ClockDiv |
 2 |          | Envelope   | WaveUpdate | Mod Speed | Resonance  | Filter K2 |          |
 3 |          | AutoEnvNum | WaveLoad W |           | Control    | Env Count |          |
 A |          | AutoEnvDen | WaveLoad P |           |            | Control   |          |
 B |          |            | WaveLoad L |           |            |           |          |
 C |          |            | WaveLoad T |           |            |           |          |
 D |          |            |            |           |            |           |          |
 4 |          |            |            |           | PResetTime | EnvRampL  |          |
 5 |          |            |            |           |            | EnvRampR  |          |
 6 |          |            |            |           |            | EnvRampK1 |          |
 7 |          |            |            |           |            | EnvRampK2 |          |
 8 |          |            |            |           |            | Env Mode  |          |

ex | QSound       | SNES      | MSM5232   |
---|--------------|-----------|-----------|
 D | Echo Level   | NoiseFreq | GroupCtrl |
 W |              | Waveform  |           |
 1 | EchoFeedback | Special   | GroupAtk  |
 2 | Echo Length  | Gain      | GroupDec  |
 3 |              |           | Noise     |
 A |              |           |           |
 B |              |           |           |
 C |              |           |           |
 D |              |           |           |
 4 |              |           |           |
 5 |              |           |           |
 6 |              |           |           |
 7 |              |           |           |
 8 |              |           |           |
